---
layout:     single
title:      "Identifier Shadowing"
date:       2021-04-24 01:45:19 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---

Identifier shadowing is when a identifier is allowed to be rebound:
```
let x = 1

{
  // Mutate outer scope
  x = 2

  // Shadow in nested scope
  let x = 2
}

// Shadow later in same scope
let x = 3
```

Languages typically handle shadowing in a few ways:
* Never allow
* Always allow
* Only allow in nested scope
* Require dev to make explicit when intent is to shadow or mutate

Elder allows aspects of shadowing but is designed in such a way as to minimize the costs often associated.


## Utility

Shadowing has utility which often prioritizing writing over reading code:
* Allow functions arguments to use whatever names they find useful instead of worrying about conflicting with other names.
  ```
  let x = 4;

  // 'f' input argument 'x' would conflict without shadowing
  function f (x, y, z)
  {
    log(x, y, z);
  }

  f(1, 2, 3);
  ```
* When dealing with repeated return values makes it easier to use the same name without creating useless name differences. Often they're only used in a series of steps and never again.
  ```
  let err, a = f();
  if (err) { log(err); return false; }

  let err, b = g(a);
  if (err) { log(err); return false; }

  let err, c = h(b);
  if (err) { log(err); return false; }

  return true;
  ```
* Can reason locally as shadowing can replace names within scope. This can help when a task requires a series of steps which typically just need the results.
  ```
  let x = 0;
  let y = 1;
  let z = 2;

  // Sub-step of total work
  step-0 = -1;
  
  {
    let vect = get-vector();
    let x    = vect.x;
    let y    = vect.y;
    let z    = vect.z;

    ...do stuff with local x, y, z...
    
    step-0 = f(x, y, z);
  }

  // Step of total work
  step-1 = -1

  {
    let vect = get-vector();
    let x    = vect.x;
    let y    = vect.y;
    let z    = vect.z;

    ...do stuff with local x, y, z...
    
    step-1 = g(x, y, z);
  }

  // Use outer x, y, z and results of each step
  h(x, y, z, step-0, step-1)
  ```
* Change metadata after a set of operations. Often to initialize dynamically and then make immutable.
  ```
  // Initialize mutable x
  let x = 4;
  x     = x + f(x);
  x     = x * g(x);
  
  // Now make x immutable
  const x = h(x);
  ```
* Emulate a mutable value without actually requiring mutable variables. Often this is how immutable, functional languages emulate mutation.
  ```
  let x = 3                      // x init to Int
  let x = f(x, 0, 2)             // x is result of f which is still some different Int
  let x = get-file-line(file, x) // x is a string of a line in a file
  let x = count-words(x)         // x is a UInt of number of words in line of file
  ```
  * The value, type, and metadata of x change with each step
  * The last step is used as the result of a series of computational steps
* When doing rapid or prototype development is less annoying as don't have to prevent inner and outer scope collision.
  * Makes writing code easier as can just reuse names without worry of conflict.
  * If functions and blocks are kept relatively small then it's easier to manually maintain. Often they are small when just starting development.


## Costs

Shadowing has costs. Here are some of the most common and severe:
* Can alter even more than mutation. Everything about a name (like it's value, type, rules, etc.) can change because is a new declaration.
  ```
  x :Range(Int, 1..10) = 1

  ... use x as Int Range from 1 to 10 ...

  x :String = user.name

  ... use x as String ...

  x :Range(Int, 5..15) = 7

  ... use x as Int Range from 5 to 15 ...
  ```
  * Inconsistent which aspects of each name is changed. The dev must keep track which aspects change at which points in the code.
  * Both useful and dangerous as dev must manually track which name version is in current scope.
* Inconsistent shadowing requires the developer to manually track which name is shadowed and which version is shadowed
  ```
  x :Range(Int, 1..10) = 1

  ... lots of code ...

  function f (x:Float, y:Int, z:Int)
  {
    ... lots of code ...

    y :Range(Float, 1..100) = 1

    ... lots of code ...

    function g (name:String)
    {
      ... lots of code ...

      // Here dev must backtrack which latest x, y, z is in scope
      log(x, y, z)
    }
  } 
  ```
  * Since some names are shadowed (and other not) it's inconsistent which are pulled in from which scope.
    * From above, at the point of the log statement, each variable is pulled in from different scopes:
      * `x` is a `Float` from function `f` and shadows previous `x`
      * `y` is a `Range(Float)` from `1 to 100` from a shadow in body of function `f` and shadows previous `y`
      * `z` is a `Int` from function `f` and doesn't shadow any other `z`
  * Shadowing makes it harder to reason because it's unclear which version of which names is used.
    * Without shadowing, developers must create different names which make it more clear which names are pulled in from which previous scopes.
    * Consistent shadowing would require developers to shadow everything from the outer scope when they want to shadow or isolate.
    * Ad-hoc shadowing (like above), is the hardest to track. A developer must visually backtrack from the point of use until they find the most recent shadow.
  * Reading code becomes harder
    * If dev misses one shadow location they can make the incorrect assumption about which version of a name is being used
    * Ad-hoc shadowing is inconsistent and must look at each name to see which are shadowed from which scope. At it's worst case, a dev must manually backtrack to see which scopes shadow at which latest point.
    * Makes code harder to scale.
      * Elder asserts it's a anti-pattern to artifically break apart functions which are used once (often inline). Ad hoc shadowing encourages this anti-pattern. Coupled code should be clearly coupled and ideally code is flat, linear, and a series of steps.
      * Requiring the dev to do more work reading than writing is a recipe for mistakes. Reading should be easier and we want our compiler to do the work of checking our writing for us.
      * As code grows, developers will lose their place. Often means they have to hold more in their head.

Most of the issues that arise from shadowing are due to it's ad-hoc nature and lack of consistency.
For systems focused on safety, the magnitude of costs can be quite large especially as the codebase grows.


## Shadowing in Elder

Elder defaults to not allow shadowing.
If a dev chooses to shadow they must do so with additional syntax.

Additionally shadowing is restricted in multiple ways to make it more consistent and fulfill the most common use-cases.

There are 3 levels to declare shadowing: global, block, and name specific. The tools available for shadowing vary based on the level.

### Global Shadow

Global shadowing has the least number and complex tools for shadowing:
* There aren't any true globals in Elder. Everything is sandboxed at the module level which doesn't cross files (most of the time).
* It's possible to include other modules (and their names) at any block within Elder. This makes it easier to avoid conflicts.
  ```
  f = Fn (x)
    // Imports names of `io/file` to this scope
    import io/file

  g = Fn (y)
    // Imports names of `io/net` to this scope
    import io/net
  ```
* Elder allows multiple methods of importing using other module names like aliasing and partial/full namespacing.
  ```
  import io/file
  import io/file as io-file
  ```
* Elder syntax allows for data syntax as well. This means it's trivial to create multiple namespaces.
  ```
  MyModule = Module
    
    position
      x = 0
      y = 1
      z = 2

    next-position
      x = 3
      y = 4
      z = 5

    log(position/x, next-position/x) // "0 3"
  ```
  Without namespacing `x, y, z` would conflict.

### Block Shadow

Block shadowing affects the entire block so it's easier to track which names can be shadowed:
* `#use` blocks are a comptime directive to isolate a block from the scope it's defined in.
  ```
  x :Int = 1
  y :Int = 2
  z :Int = 3

  ... later on ...

  // z is available for shadowing because not in list of #use input
  #use x, y
    z :Float = 4.0

  ... later on ...

  // x, y is available for shadowing because not in list of #use input
  #use z
    x :Float = 5.0
    y :Float = 6.0
  ```
  * `#use` creates a new, isolated scope.
  * `#use` doesn't allow shadowing of the included names from the outer scope, but all else can be.
  * `#use` requires some names to be provided.
  * Allows developer to reason locally while having a single place to see the listing of names
  * Adapted from Brian Will's syntax (which itself was adapted from Jonathan Blow's Jai language)
* A special-case of `#use` is not including any names. It's so common we give it a special name `#isolate` and is used in the same way.
  ```
  x :Int = 1
  y :Int = 2
  z :Int = 3

  ... later on ...

  // all names are available for shadowing because isolated scope
  #isolate
    x :Float = 5.0
    y :Float = 6.0
    x :Float = 7.0
  ```

### Name Specific Shadow

Name specific shadowing alters the behavior of a name making it's shadowing behavior more consistent:
* `#unique` compiler directive requires that no name within the same module can shadow it. It is treated as a module unique value and is enforced by the compiler.
  ```
  x #unique = 1

  ... later on ...

  #use
    x :Int = 8 // Will throw a compile time error because x can't be shadowed
  ```
  * This makes it very consistent as names become uniquely defined within their modules
* `#shadow` requires that each assignment is a new declaration. Each assigment shadows each previous one.
  * This captures a few common patterns which otherwise require manual tracking of shadowing or mutation
    * Error and return value chaining can be created without creating arbitrary names
      ```
      err #shadow = -1 
      ret #shadow = -1

      ret, err == f()
      if (err) { log(err); return false; }

      // Both ret and err are shadowed
      ret, err == g(ret);
      if (err) { log(err); return false; }

      // Both ret and err are shadowed
      ret, err == h(ret);
      if (err) { log(err); return false; }

      return true;
      ```
    * Some names have keywords within their scope to aid computation. Shadowing is essential to support this. For example, the `for` loop has a `it` keyword representing an item:
      ```
      for books
        log(it) // Log a book

        for it.pages
          log it // Log a page
    
          for it.words
            log it // Log a word
      ```

## Alternatives to Shadowing

Even better than shadowing is using other tools to perform the same job. If those tools are terse it makes them a viable alternative.

Here are some of the tools Elder provides which can replace some common use-cases shadowing is often used for:
* `do` executes a block and then returns the result.
  ```
  x = do
    a = 4
    a = a + f(a)
    a = a * g(a)
    a = h(a)
    a
  ```
  Instead of shadowing can run a block with a mutable variable and just assign it to a immutable value.
* Piping (`|>` syntax) makes it easier to process a sequence of steps.

  ```
  x = 0 |>
    + 1
    * 2
    % 3
  ```
  Instead of using shadowing to explicitly pass a name can pipe each operation
* Versioning comptime directive requires one to version depending on a specific change
  ```
  x #version(#shadow) = 1

  ... later in code ...

  x' = 2

  ... later in code ...

  x'' = 3
  ```
  Here each version of `x` share a similar name but we use priming `'` to indicate a new version.
  * A developer can do this manually but asking the compiler to enfoce it for you makes it a guarantee.
  * Several syntaxes are supported to indicate a new version like `x'`, `x2`, `x-2`, `x_2`
  * Note that this is a general compiler tool to support multiple aspects of code like: `#version(#shadow), #version(#mutate), #version(#shadow or #mutate)` and really deserves it's own discussion.


## Test Use-Cases

Just proposing different tools for shadowing and alternatives isn't enough to know how well they work.
We need to test these out against the most common use-cases and assure it works better when compared to the normal method of shadowing. 
Additionally the tools should fulfill other criteria like jiving with the rest of the language, working well under composition, consistent usage patterns, easy to visually track, among others.

We'll go through each use-case (from above) one at at time:
* When function argument names conflict with globals we now have a few solutions:
  * Since Elder syntax is data, create a new namespace for the globals:
    ```
    // Here 'position' acts like a namespace
    position
      x = 0
      y = 0
      z = 0

    f = Fn (x:Int, y:Int, z:Int)
      log("globals: ", position/x, position/y)
      log("locals: ", x, y, z)
    ```
  * similarly create a namespace for the function inputs
    ```
    x = 0
    y = 0
    z = 0

    f = Fn (position/(x:Int, y:Int, z:Int))
      log("globals: ", x, y, z)
      log("locals: ", position/x, position/y, position/z)
    ```
  * isolate a function so it can't see outside names
    ```
    x = 0
    y = 0
    z = 0

    // Since the Fn is isolated it's able to shadow
    f = #isolate Fn (x:Int, y:Int, z:Int)
      log("locals: ", x, y, z)
    ```
* When repeated return names would conflict or require arbitrary naming
  * Enforce a consistent shadowing names we know will be repeated
    ```
    ret #shadow = -1
    err #shadow = -1 

    ret, err = f();
    if (err) { log(err); return false; }

    ret, err = g(ret);
    if (err) { log(err); return false; }

    ret, err = h(ret);
    if (err) { log(err); return false; }

    return true;
    ```
  * Similarly enforce a versioning names we know will be repeated
    ```
    ret #version(#shadow) = -1
    err #version(#shadow) = -1 

    ret', err' = f();
    if (err') { log(err'); return false; }

    ret'', err'' = g(ret');
    if (err'') { log(err''); return false; }

    ret''', err''' = h(ret'');
    if (err''') { log(err'''); return false; }

    return true;
    ```
* Reason locally which can help when a task requires a series of steps which often only use the results.
  ```
  x = 0
  y = 1
  z = 2

  // Sub-step of total work
  step-0 = #isolate
    let vect = get-vector()
    let x    = vect.x
    let y    = vect.y
    let z    = vect.z

    ...do stuff with local x, y, z...
    
    f(x, y, z)

  // Step of total work
  step-1 = #isolate
    let vect = get-vector()
    let x    = vect.x
    let y    = vect.y
    let z    = vect.z

    ...do stuff with local x, y, z...
    
    g(x, y, z)

  ...do stuff with outer x, y, z and step-0, step-1 results...
  ```
* Change metadata after mutation. Often to mutate while initializing and then seal to make immutable.
  * Use `do` execution to initialize
    ```
    x = do
      a = 4
      a = a + f(a)
      a = a * g(a)
      a = h(a)
      a
    ```
  * or use piping (notice that `in` is a keyword of the pipe (`|>`) operator and represents the previous step's output)

    ```
    x = 4 |>
      + f(in)
      * g(in)
        h(in)
    ```
* Emulate mutation using shadowing which is often a series of steps
  * The simplest is to use piping as it can handle changing types
    ```
    x = 3 |>
      f(in, 0, 2)
      get-file-line(file, in)
      count-words(in)
    ```
  * You can also combine multiple tools; for example this uses an isolated `do` block combined with a shadow enforced name
    ```
    x = #isolate do
      x #shadow :Int
      x = 3
      x = f(x, 0, 2)
      x = get-file-len(file, x)
      x = count-words(x)
      x
    ```


## Summary

To avoid the ad-hoc tools most languages provide for shadowing, Elder requires shadowing to be more consistent in it's use.

The compiler tools for shadowing target a few levels:
* Global level, for a given module or context
* Block level, which apply to the entire block
* Name level, which require the specific name to follow a specific set of rules

Even better is to avoid shadowing.
Elder provides some tools which are alternatives to shadowing which are often equally terse.

When the tools are combined, the common use-cases (and justification) for shadowing are covered.
More importantly, they remove much of the error-prone visual-tracking and mental juggling developers can experience when using shadowing.
